# Dispersal-mediated coexistence in metacommunities with self-organised pattern formation

I conducted my M. Sc. thesis at Potsdam University with the working group Ecology and Ecosystem Modelling for the masters program Ecology, Evolution, and Conservation. My reasearch was supervised by [Christian Guill](https://www.uni-potsdam.de/de/ibb-ecology/mitarbeiterinnen/dr-christian-guill-1) and focused on the role of dispersal in metacommunities with self-organised pattern formation. The tri-trophic food web model is based on differential equations and implemented in Python. I used a variety of mathematical and ecological tools to analyse the model.  
<br>
All code works out of the box. If you want to reproduce the data, run the respective simulation file first. However, all required simulation output is already conducted and can be used immediately to reproduce the figures from the visualisation scripts.  

## Abstract
<p align="justify">
Dispersal is an important factor in shaping population structure and competition between individuals. By doing so, dispersal helps maintain the stability and resilience of the ecosystem by buffering against threats of fragmentation and habitat loss. In a competitive environment, dispersal is often linked to competition in ways similar to the classical competition-colonisation trade-off. This means that theoretical research generally assumes dispersal to be linked to competitive strength, which may not be able to precisely detect the role of dispersal. I show that when consumers only differ in their dispersal strategy, spatial heterogenisation of a metacommunity in a homogeneous two-patch habitat occurs. Self-organised pattern formation emerges from spatial heterogeneity without requiring trade-offs in competitive strength. Self-organised pattern formation has often been described as promoting coexistence and biodiversity. When competitive differences are based purely on dispersal strategy, pattern formation induces consumer coexistence only for a narrow parameter range. This also strongly depends on the type of plastic dispersal, since coexistence through pattern formation is not found for fitness- and crowding-dependent dispersal. Furthermore, an evolutionary invasion analysis shows that the type of plasticity can revert the direction and stability of evolution. This helps to bridge the gap of how dispersal leads to the emergence of self-organised pattern formation and how it impacts population structure without obscuring the effect of dispersal through further modifications to competition.
</p>
